for many of us one of the most memorable
musical phenomena
this was the unexpected appearance of
Gretzky's third symphony the symphony of
sorrowful songs this work exploded many
conventions in 1992 to 93 the electro
nonsense recording by the soprano dawn
Upshaw with the London Sinfonietta
conducted by David Zinman sold over a
million copies worldwide
and inspired over a dozen further
recordings by other artists it broke
into the top of the popular music charts
an unheard-of event
it reached audiences who hadn't hitherto
considered listening to a piece of
classical music let alone one written
recently it also proved controversial in
certain circles largely because of the
immediacy of its expressive impact
contemporary classical music after all
should not have that because of its
broad audience reach contemporary music
shouldn't have that either and because
of its so-called holy minimalism one of
the labels with which some critics
dismissed not only Gretzky's sacred
music but also that by other
contemporary composers from the former
Soviet bloc such as the Estonian arvo
pet and the Georgian Gaia can surely
more destructively I think have been the
attempts attempts to associate its
transcendent message to world events
such as wars and famines it's been used
outside Gretzky's original context in
both documentary and feature films and
even today barely a month goes by
without its second movement being used
as a convenient musical crutch for some
harrowing or moving scene on television
or radio but of course the music is now
public property and therefore its
original text and context are frequently
of no interest to its users the more
facile of whom reached for it with
indiscriminate carelessness in all the
amazing circus that surrounded the
symphony with the composer fated across
continents it's easy to forget more
profound truths about both him and this
piece
firstly it was written way back in 1976
and its impact then was very local its
qualities were gradually recognized
particularly in this country in the mid
1980s
and particularly by the conductor David
Atherton and the BBC prior to that rare
copies of the first LP recording with
the soprano who gave the premiere in
France in 1977 Stephane oh boy towage
had been handed from one enthusiast to
the next potential convert with barely
concealed excitement and amazement we're
in danger of ignoring the third
symphonies ground-breaking qualities
however not many other composers would
dare to write a symphony a symphony for
soprano and orchestra whose duration is
almost an hour and which consists of
just three slow movements in
straightforward modal and diatonic
idioms it's also a very polish work the
texts are in Polish and they concerned
Polish religious culture and historical
events the music also makes use of
Polish Easter hymns in the first
movement and asylees e'en folk song
alongside a clear reference to shopper
and a more obscure one to Beethoven in
the finale all in all it's one of the
most individual musical creations of the
post-war period it also belongs to a
pantheon of major commemorative pieces
that includes from this country alone
Tippett's a child of our time and
Britain's war Requiem